Let's say you created a CNN to perform binary classification.
For example, if a lung has nodules or not.
The output of the algorithm is actually not one or zero,
nodules or no nodules.
It actually will output a probability ranging from
0-1 that indicates how likely the image belongs to a class.
For example, the algorithm might say there is
60 percent probability that this image has nodules in it.
But does 60 percent probability make it high enough
for us to make the decision that nodules are present in the image?
We will need a cut-off value called threshold to assist us in making that decision.
The output of your algorithm will range from 0-1,
just like what is shown in this figure.
A value of one indicates that your model is 100 percent certain that the given image
belongs to a given class and a value of
zero indicates that your model is zero percent share.
It belongs to that class.
Recall that the CNN model outputs a value of 0.6, somewhere here.
If we choose a cutoff threshold of 0.5,
where everything that your algorithm returns above 0.5 is considered positive,
or in this case having nodules and everything below 0.5 is negative for nodules.
With a threshold of 0.5,
we would say that this image has nodules since
0.6 falls in the range of nodules being present.
This choice of threshold,
however, can be varied.
For example, if we choose 0.7 as the cutoff value.
Now, the output above 0.7 is considered positive and everything below is negative.
In this case, if having the threshold of 0.7,
we would end up saying our image has no nodules because 0.6 is below 0.7.
See how the different decisions that you make in threshold make your output different?
Depending on the performance metrics that you want to maximize,
you want to vary your threshold that is used to
make your nodule versus no nodule classification.
Let's look at some different examples of how this might play out.
We'll stick with my lung nodule classifier and the 0.5. threshold example.
Let's say I have 10 chest X-rays and only four truly have nodules shown in green.
I've ordered them here by the CNN output probability.
Now, I'll apply my default threshold 0.5,
and I end up with
four true negative X-rays and one false negative in the no nodules classification.
I have two false positives and all three true positives in the nodules classification.
My precision ends up being 3 true positives divided by 3 true positives plus
2 false positives and my recall is
3 true positives divided by 3 true positives plus 1 false negative.
What happens if I change my threshold?
Here, I'll increase my threshold.
Since maybe this will help me weed out some false positives.
I end up with five true negative X-rays now in
the no nodules classification and still one that's a false negative.
Only one false positive X-ray and three true positive in the nodules classification.
Now, my precision ends up being 0.75 and my recall actually stays the same.
Do you see how recall and precision values vary when different thresholds are chosen?
Rather than manually calculating all of these different scenarios for your classifier,
you can generate something called a precision-recall curve.
Each point along the graph represents a different threshold value.
So depending on whether you want to maximize precision or maximize recall,
you can choose your threshold more easily with a visual curve like this.
Is all of this making you wish that you could just stick
with accuracy and have one score?
Well, you can.
For binary classification problems,
there's a score called the F1 score,
which combines both precision and recall and allows us to
better measure a test accuracy when there are class imbalances.
Mathematically, it is the harmonic mean of precision and recall.
You can often just use the F1 score to indicate your algorithms spinal performance,
since it is maximized when precision and recall are balanced,
which simplifies your life a bit,
as it only requires you to report on a single metric.